---
title: "Generalized Persistence Algorithm for Decomposing Multi-parameter Persistence Modules"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2022-02-05-paper-1
excerpt: 'Generalize the persistence algorithm to compute decompositions of multi-parameter persistence modules.'
date: 2022-02-05
venue: 'Journal of Applied and Computational Topology (JACT)'
paperurl: 'http://jackal092927.github.io/files/paper1.pdf'
citation: 'Tamal K. Dey and Cheng Xin. Generalized persistence algorithm for decomposing multiparameter persistence modules. J Appl. and Comput. Topology 6, 271–322 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/s41468-022-00087-5'
---

The classical persistence algorithm computes the unique decomposition of a per-
sistence module implicitly given by an input simplicial filtration. Based on matrix
reduction, this algorithm is a cornerstone of the emergent area of topological data
analysis. Its input is a simplicial filtration defined over the integers $\mathbb{Z}$ giving rise to
a 1-parameter persistence module. It has been recognized that multiparameter ver-
sion of persistence modules given by simplicial filtrations over d-dimensional integer
grids $\mathbb{Z}^d$ is equally or perhaps more important in data science applications. How-
ever, in the multiparameter setting, one of the main challenges is that topological
summaries based on algebraic structure such as decompositions and bottleneck dis-
tances cannot be as efficiently computed as in the 1-parameter case because there is no
known extension of the persistence algorithm to multiparameter persistence modules.
We present an efficient algorithm to compute the unique decomposition of a finitely
presented persistence module $M$ defined over the multiparameter $\mathbb{Z}^d$. The algorithm
first assumes that the module is presented with a set of $N$ generators and relations
that are distinctly graded. Based on a generalized matrix reduction technique it runs
in $O(N^{2\omega+1})$ time where $\omega < 2.373$ is the exponent of matrix multiplication. This is
much better than the well known algorithm called Meataxe which runs in $O(N^{6(d+1)})$
time on such an input. In practice, persistence modules are usually induced by sim-
plicial filtrations. With such an input consisting of $n$ simplices, our algorithm runs in
$O(n^{(d-1)(2\omega+1)})$ time for $d \geq 2$. For the special case of zero dimensional homology,
it runs in time $O(n^{2\omega+1})$.

<!-- [Download paper here]([http://jackal092927.github.io/files/paper1.pdf](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/s41468-022-00087-5.pdf)) -->

<!-- Recommended citation: Tamal K. Dey and Cheng Xin. Generalized persistence algorithm for decomposing multiparameter persistence modules. J Appl. and Comput. Topology 6, 271–322 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/s41468-022-00087-5 -->
<!-- Tamal K. Dey and Cheng Xin. Generalized persistence algorithm for decomposing multi-parameterpersistence modules.arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.03766, 2019 -->
